Morocco’s Big Breaks: Surf industry brings welcome changes to coastal Morocco 




Najah Mateen


ANZA, Morocco--Youness Saghraoui used to fish. Not as a pastime, but as a career. Eight years ago he spent his days in the water, but not the way he wanted to. That’s because Saghraoui, 31, is a surfer.


Morocco is a surf destination, and an increasing amount of tourists have made small towns in Morocco their surf destinations. Most famous of all in the Agadir region is Taghazout. Taghazout boasts many surf shops, camps and hostels and its cafes and restaurants cater to a tourist customer base. These surf-based businesses have created new opportunities for local residents. Jobs have opened up, in the form of surf-instruction, as well as jobs in the restaurant and hospitality industry. It has been such an example of surf related development, it has inspired academic theories.


Saghraoui hails from the nearby town of Anza, which is trying to ride the surf development wave. “[Surfing] changed my life,” Saghraoui says. He’s leaning back in a plastic chair in front of Cafe Anza Spot, which like its name implies, is on the beach of Anza, a coastal town in Agadir, Morocco. He holds a lit, hand-rolled cigarette. He’s surrounded by his surf friends, Joel Darrigues, a Frenchman and ex-pro surfer, a blond surfer from Brazil who introduces himself as merely Piero, and is joined by Zakaria Habbad, 22, a Moroccan surfer. This is a table that seats men from all over the world.


Saghraoui’s days of fishing are over and now he has a job he enjoys, that of a surf instructor. Most of his students are foreign tourists, and range in age. He’s surfed most of his life, but it wasn’t until eight years ago that he received the training to teach surfing. “Before we didn’t have lessons to teach the people,” he says. “We surfed but we didn’t have lessons.”  He gestures to Darrigues, 56.  Darrigues was an instrumental part in Saghraoui’s training, since he is a member of a surf federation in France that came to Morocco to train locals so they could become certified surf instructors. “[They] invited the poor surfers to come, to teach the [poor] people to surf,” Saghraoui recounts. 


Surf instructors may make a decent living, but they don’t necessarily make more money than fishermen. As a surf instructor, Saghraoui says he can make 250DH per day, if he has one lesson a day. As a fisherman, he could make up to 1000DH per night. This begs the question: why would anyone go from a fisherman to a surf instructor? For Saghraoui, it’s simple. “If you are a surfer and you work in some factory, or something like this...you are not happy in your work,” he says. “But if you are a surfer and at the same time you are a surf instructor, you are happy in your work, and you don’t think you are working.” 


Taghazout: surfing success story


Taghazout,  which is practically Anza’s neighbor,  is an example of a surf town success story. The streets are filled with bronzed foreigners lugging surfboards. There are surf shops, surf tours, surf houses, and surf camps. Taghazout enjoys so much popularity because the surfers are coming from places where, during the winter months,  it might be too cold to surf, like Germany. 


That’s where Laura Pellen, 30 is from. She’s never surfed in her life. “My first surf lesson is tomorrow morning,” she says. She plans to try surfing for the first time in Taghazout. She’s been told that, “The weather is good, the waves are good.” Also, Morocco and Germany are relatively close. She’s staying at Surf Maroc, the oldest and most popular place for surfers to gather, which boasts overnight accommodations and a cafe. 


Surfing a Wave of Economic Growth


Surfing improving local economies is not unique to Morocco. In 2017, Samuel Wills of the University of Sydney, along with Thomas McGregor of the University of Oxford published Surfing a Wave of Economic Growth, a paper that presents their research on what good waves do for economies. Via email, Wills was able to shed some light on their research. According to Wills, the idea for the paper came from when he visited Taghazout,  Morocco, to surf. Wills expected a sleepy fishing village and he was surprised when he flew in at night to see that the village of Taghazout was far from sleepy. Taghazout  lit up much more brightly than the rest of the area. 
 
Wills goes on to write, “Natural amenities like good surf breaks can be thought of as augmenting both physical capital and labor. They augment the productivity of physical capital like tourist infrastructure, by providing a basis for recreational industries and tourism.”  


Their research consisted of testing “whether good [surf] breaks increase economic activity- measured using satellite images of night-time light intensity-in the surrounding areas relative to bad breaks.”  Specifically in Taghazout, the awesome breaks have led to the creation of tourism infrastructure. New restaurants, hotels, surf resorts, and surf camps have been built, which has created the need for roads to be developed. Even now, the streets are filled with construction projects as more opportunities in the hotel, housing, and restaurant industries become apparent.


Anza: Cleaning up its act


Anza hasn’t quite reached the level of notoriety that Taghazout enjoys, but Anza had a bit more to conquer. Mainly, the economic problems many of its poor inhabitants dealt with, and how unsanitary the town was. Anza used to be home to many slums, including what Youba Darif, 23, and from Anza, called the biggest shanty town in Agadir. Anza was, Darif recalls, “A place for crime and… and it was known for its mild odor.” The smell came from the factories and their improper disposal of waste. However the slums were demolished and things began looking up for Anza.


Mariyem Gamar, 20, notes that Anza has come a long way. As someone living in Anza, she witnessed these changes in the last five years. According to her, the community of Anza took matters into their own hands to clean up Anza. “I used to go to high school and it used to be like the desert, there was nothing, no activity, and then like people...they cleaned the area,” Gamar says. 


Darif echoes Gamar, saying that, “It’s not the government, it’s young people trying to make this place better and clean the beach.” This did not just make Anza more attractive to tourists; the people living there benefitted from that too. “Surfing was a chance for Anza to make a step forward,” Darif says. 


Surf instructors are not the only ones who enjoy economic benefits when foreigners come to try their hand at surfing. More people in town, from out of town, means more money for local businesses.  Gamar says that these business owners “...also get more clients in...local cafes, local stores.” 


Cultural change?
 
In addition to the economic benefits, Wills acknowledges the possibility that surf tourists could erode or alter the cultural experience in the towns they flock to. “It might be a culture shock,” Darif says. He’s referring to how Morocco is relatively conservative and tourists might not be prepared for this. But mostly, Darif sees the tourists as a positive. “I noticed that people in the places like Taghazout are more open. They have more acceptance and tolerance for foreign people.”


Even though Habbad isn’t the biggest fan of Taghazout he has good things to say about the people there. “It’s easy to make friends in Taghazout, everyone there is nice,” he says.


Also, most remarkably, Darif says, “They learn languages because of their relationships with foreign people.” This is the case with Saghraoui, who picked up French, English, and Spanish in his time as a surf instructor. 


A negative could be that many children growing up in these towns may choose surfing over their studies. “If there’s good waves they leave their studies and go to surf. There’s a lot of people doing this,” Darif acknowledges. Darif himself wanted to surf, but his parents encouraged him to focus on his studies. 


The surf economy in Morocco seems set to keep on expanding and surfers are coming to Morocco, to Agadir in much bigger numbers now. Actually, people are coming to Agadir in bigger numbers period. Last February, Agadir boasted a 18% increase in overnight stays compared to 2016 (tourisme.gov.ma). For the same period, Rabat experienced a 3% decline in overnight stays. 
 
Geographically speaking, Morocco is pretty close to a lot of European countries where surf tourists come from. The cost of living (or surfing) is even less. Prices depend on what a person is looking for. For example, Surf Camp Taghazout offers a bed and breakfast from as low as €13/night. They also offer surf lessons for as low as €30. That’s just one example because Taghazout has plenty of options. And, while tourists can surf in Morocco without breaking the bank, their instructors can make deposits to their own banks. The weather of Agadir, which normally consists of sunshine and clear skies, and its good waves are what makes it a prime surfing location. All in all, a win-win.   


It’s not all about the money, though. “Because,” Darrigues says,“ if you have some friends,  sunshine, big waves-” he pauses here and Habbad interjects. “Enough,” Habbad says. And there are nods all around. 


These surfers are a community, they are friends and comrades. It’s no wonder that not only do new people come to Morocco to surf in droves, surfers like Darrigues make return trips and lifelong friends. Morocco has it all: friendly people, good weather, good waves, and prices tourists don’t balk at. It helps that, as Darrigues so eloquently puts it, “Morocco is a magical place to surf.” Here’s to surfing being magical for its economy. 




Special thanks to Zakaria Habbad and the Connect Institute