Najah Mateen
April 10, 2016
Comp 103
Hall


Hip Hop Ain’t Nun but Ho’s and Tricks: The Negative Effects of Hip-Hop Stereotypes on the Perceptions of Beauty Amongst Black Women


There is so much pressure on a woman, as a woman, to be beautiful. As Maya Poran puts it,” the beauty standard holds much more importance for women than for men” (66).  As young girls grow up, they are constantly bombarded with images of the women they should aspire to look like. For African American young women, growing up in a society with a double identity, in so much that they are American, and have to live up to the standards upheld by American society, but they are also of African descent, and have expectations based upon that, it can be a challenge. Hip-hop, from the time of its conception, has always been an influence upon people of color. In hop-hop, Blacks, and especially Black youths, found music they could relate to. However, as John McWhorter maintains in his article, How Hip-Hop Holds Blacks Back, hip-hop has evolved from the laid back storytelling it once was, to a more violent, misogynic atmosphere that may influence Black youth in negative ways.  Hip-hop and media stereotypes like the “video girl” and “bad bitch” negatively effects the perception African-American young women have of themselves. In Sharpley-Whiting’s Pimp’s Up, Ho’s Down, it is noted that “…the collision between hip hop culture and beauty culture, the marketing and packaging of the “same” video girl who resembles the high- fashion model who resembles the latest Hollywood “It” girl…has a clear and deleterious impact on what young black female consumers come to identify as desirable” (32-33).  Far too often, women of mixed race or with light skin take the spotlight in various roles as actresses and lead roles in music videos, implying when it comes to Black women, these types of women are the ideal (Sharpley-Whiting 27).  In Poran’s study it was found that although a high amount of Black women exhibited self-confidence in their body appearance, they still were aware of the standard of beauty. Many of the Black women observed two standards of beauty, one for Europeans and one for African Americans.  The African American standard of beauty was characterized by “long hair”, “light skin”, slim features and, in contrast to the European standard of beauty, a nice sized behind and chest, and small waist (Poran 75).  With pressure from society for her to look a certain way, there is a risk that a Black woman will grow up unsatisfied because she can never look that way. 
The hip-hop portrayal of the video girl offers an unrealistic ideal for African-American women. Essentially, the video girl provides a prototype or model for what women should like, subtly saying that all women should look a certain way. We see this here, in Tupac’s song “All About U”, where he laments seeing the same types of girls that have surrounded him since his fame (Sharpley-Whiting 26). Tupac may be referring to the groupies but if we take it to mean same hoes in a physical way, maybe he is referring to how these girls look and behave.  This also ties back into the “light skin” versus “dark skin” debate. Far too often, women in hip hop, both in song lyrics and music videos have been depicted with lighter skin and long hair.  Sharpley-Whiting asserts, “that the vast majority of the young women in these videos are either fairer-skinned, ethnically mixed, or of indeterminate ethnic/racial origins with long, straight, or curly hair would suggest that along with the stereotypes of hypersexuality and sexual accessibility, a particular type of beauty is offered up as ideal (27).  Consequently, from an early age, Black girls are taught to associate beauty with a certain look, instead of being exposed to the beauty in different skin shades and body types. 


In addition to hip-hop stereotypes affecting how Black women see themselves physically, hip-hop stereotypes allow negative connotations and misogynistic mindsets to be bred in these women psychologically. Hip-hop has been accused on numerous occasions of being misogynistic, largely due to song lyrics, where women, typically, but not limited to, Black women, are often called “bitches”, “hos”, “tricks”, and other colorful words. “For the most part, scholars agree that images of manhood in rap music are hypersexual, misogynistic, and violent” (Herd 580). The underlying message here is that Black men seek to validate or prove their hyper-masculinity by presenting Black women in their songs and videos as inferior, objectified, and merely tools for their own pleasure. In fact, due to hip-hop culture even female artists have referred to themselves in negative ways, leading to a culture where being a “bitch”, or more specifically, a “bad bitch” is a good thing. For example, Nicki Minaj, one the top female rap artists today, constantly refers to herself as “the baddest” and a “bad bitch”. When one looks at her success as a rapper and her huge fan base, which includes plenty of young African American girls, one may question how a woman degrading herself could be looked up to. In Chicago hip-hop artists Lupe Fiasco’s popular song, “Bitch Bad”, he gives his own explanation for what seems to be a confusing statement. “Bitch Bad” is essentially discussing the different definitions a teen guy and teen girl may have for the phrase “bad bitch”.  Lupe raps, “… he thinks she a bad bitch and she thinks she a bad bitch/He thinks disrespectfully, she thinks of that sexually.” Here Fiasco is saying when a female refers to herself as a “bad bitch” she means that she is sexually enticing, and a man may also see her as sexually enticing, but feel as if she isn’t respectable because she’s still a “bitch”. Fiasco also touches on how women will refer to themselves and friends as “bitch(es)” but will get up in arms if someone else calls them “bitch(es)”. It cannot be at all healthy for Black women to immerse themselves in a culture that disrespects them and their bodies so blatantly, enabling them to do the same.  
Although hip-hop is not the only music genre that objectifies women, hip-hop has become a genre where women are constantly disrespected and, for the few female rappers out there, instead of the music industry focusing on their talent, the focus is usually on their bodies and sexual attributes. One of the most widely used examples of the objectification of women is the rapper Nelly, in his music video for his song, “Tip Drill”.  Elizabeth F. Farrell discusses this in her article “It’s Getting Hot in Here”. “Tip Drill” refers to a woman with a nice body but an ugly face, making her only good for sex (Farrell). This sexually explicit video “…includes images of topless women gyrating as Nelly and fellow rappers throw money at them, and of a man sliding a credit card between a woman's bare buttocks” (Farrell).  While many people expressed outrage at Nelly, there should have been more disgust for the woman who allowed herself to be degraded in that matter. But hip-hop is full of women who put themselves in situations where they are little more than sexual objects, expected to perform acts no matter how tasteless, dehumanizing or objectifying. The effects of hip-hop have led young Black women to believe they should desire to be objectified, trading their respect and decency for a few dollars. Even those these so called “video hos” aren’t respected, they are constantly being put in the spotlight as something desirable to Black men and something young girls should aspire to be.  In addition to being disrespected, these half-dressed women in videos reinforce stereotypes that Black women are overly sexual. In fact, watching these videos can encourage Black women to engage in unsafe sexual activity. A study done at Emory university on Alabama girls showed that a high consumption of hip-hop videos corresponded negatively with a higher number of sexually transmitted diseases, drug (and alcohol) abuse, and even multiple sex partners (Sharpley-Whiting 26-27). 
Hip-hop stereotypes, like any stereotypes are not just dangerous to African -American women; in fact they can negatively affect how society perceives African-Americans as a whole. Already, the mediums of the media, like the news, portray Black men as criminal, volatile, violent, and irresponsible. Music videos only add to the media’s ammunition. Many song lyrics glorify sexual, physical, and emotional abuse of Black women, and these are songs by Black men. In addition, in keeping with the “thug” persona, Black men in hip-hop seem to feel the need to promote things like violence, drugs, and misogyny within music videos (McWhorter). Apparently one cannot be “hard” and a “real nigga” if they treat women with respect, and seek women that respect themselves.   What Black men don’t seem to realize is that in disrespecting their women, they are disrespecting themselves, and giving other people permission to do the same. The scantily clad woman in a rapper’s music video is someone’s mother, aunt, sister, or daughter. Exploiting, disrespecting, and mistreating a Black woman should not be something that Black men support. In addition, by including these “video vixens” in their music videos, rappers are promoting these types of women. By making these “video vixens” the standard of beauty, it instills in Black girls that these are the types of women men desire. If a thirteen-year-old girl sees her favorite rapper with a seductively dancing girl in a music video, she may reason this is what men want in a significant other. As Lupe Fiasco notes, she isn’t seeing a paid actress but something to aspire to in hopes of attracting either a man or money.