Snapchat Me That Pretty:
How Social Media is Turning Our Girls into Plastic
Everything has beauty but not everyone sees it
 Confucius
Almost every household has a plethora of mirrors. My personal favorite is the bathroom mirror, perfect for the “bathroom selfie”, applying makeup, and just plain critical analysis of my face.  The first thing in the morning, I wash my face and am confronted with an image of my “I woke up like this” self, and that image is not pretty. But what is pretty anyway? What is the magic formula for beautiful? Is it a skin shade or a hair length?  I believe that society is constantly changing the beauty ideals, but no matter what the current beauty ideal is, some people do not fit the mold. Today’s trend of Instagram baddies, with tiny, tiny, waists, big, round behinds, and perky bosoms, some curtesy of the gym, some from God, and quite a few from Dr. Miami, is definitely not what the typical woman looks like.  Even Black women come in all sizes, and yes some are curvaceous, but some are slim. Some are big boned some are slender. Some carry a few extra pounds, and some carry a lot of extra weight. We live in a society plastered with huge ads, selling everything from eyeliner to Calvin Klein. On television, we are bombarded with all types of pills and lotions that promise weight loss, acne free skin, wrinkle free skin and whiter teeth. So much money is spent on appearance, especially when it comes to women. Women spend money on makeup, hair product, clothing, shoes, handbags, accessories, cosmetic surgery, and so much more. I believe this superficial society we live in is creating beauty ideals most women can never live up to, which leads to feelings of low self-esteem and self-worth, as well as women taking matters into their hands: trying to become what beauty is instead of seeing beauty in who they already are. 
Obviously, the outward appearance of a woman is important to her. How many girls have been told if they dress a certain way, or act a certain way they will “never get a man”?  So many aspects of a young girl’s life are dictated by what a man would and wouldn’t be attracted to. I know from personal experience. I have had occasions where I dress up, pull my heels out, and do my makeup, and on my way out the door, my mother would ask: “Who you getting cute for?” The idea that women get cute for men is so engraved in our society.  According to John Berger, “[m]en look at women…women watch themselves being looked at” (168).  Ultimately, women are the viewed and men are the viewers, which is why women are so particular about their appearance.  It’s a running joke that women take forever to get ready, but when a man has to go somewhere, he can be dressed in ten minutes. There is nothing wrong with looking nice, but some women have taken beauty ideal too far, and will try to change their natural bodies with surgery or outrageous diets.  There used to be an expectation for women to be very thin, but nowadays, especially when it comes to women of color, what’s “trending” is thick women: women with excessively tiny waists, and big behinds. The waist trainer has gained popularity, even though it can’t be healthy to try to squeeze a waist into a certain shape. Also, plastic surgery is very common. What used to be reserved for the very wealthy is now something every day women do. Women get plastic surgery everywhere. Also, many women get fat transfers, sucking unwanted fat out of the stomach and placing it in the butt area.  Most women will not admit to doing these procedures for men, but they want to feel pretty or beautiful, or up to par. Interestingly enough, many men do express that they want women who are thick, or with big booties and small waist, especially in the arena of rap and social media. Men post #WCW (Women Crush Wednesdays) of women with obviously surgically enhanced bodies. Rappers rap about how many “bitches” they got and how big their booties are.  Young girls idolize people like Nicki Minaj, a female rapper famous for her butt, which is not even real. 
Social media already places a huge emphasis on how people look.  Apps like snapchat and Instagram allow users to upload videos and pictures, which is not a bad thing but people are becoming obsessed with appearance. I myself walk down the street sometimes, and if the lighting is good, can’t resist snapping a selfie. Girls on social media are becoming “Instagram Famous” for how they look, especially their bodies.  So many of them edit their photos to achieve perfection. Meanwhile, their followers are thinking that’s how they naturally look. There was a girl I followed on Instagram who became popular from the comedic videos she made. She was a very beautiful girl, but she ended up getting her breasts surgically enhanced.  Before the surgery, she was gorgeous. After, she was still pretty, but I couldn’t help but feel like she was sending the message that it’s okay to be dissatisfied with your natural body because plastic surgery can fix it. 
Bleaching is probably one of the worst side effects of Western beauty ideals, which place emphasis on girls having lighter skin tones.  More and more girls are turning to bleaching to get lighter skin. Not only is skin bleaching dangerous, as it has been linked to skin cancers, it is psychologically damaging. These girls are actually so disgusted with their own skin color that they seek to change it. Alternatively, some girls turn to filtering pictures and using makeup several shades lighter than their natural skin color.