The Wickedest Little City: Law in a Lawless Time
How Dodge City Did Law in Cowtown Days 
Najah Mateen


‘Welcome to Dodge City, the biggest, wildest, wickedest little city on the continent.’[1]


Introduction
If you rode into Dodge City in the 1870s as a tired cowhand, after bringing in a herd from Texas, your first stop would probably be the saloon for a hard-earned drink. And if you rode into the saloon, you would probably find lots of people like yourself, tired cowboys who wanted to have a good ol’ time and let off some steam before getting back into the saddle and riding off for the frontier.  Perhaps you would first stop to check your gun with a lawman before stumbling into the saloon. Perhaps not. If you happened to offend another drinker in the saloon, there’s a chance you would get into a brawl. If you’re really lucky (or perhaps unlucky), you might witness a higher level of offense, one that has men reaching for their guns, ready to draw.  
The scene is familiar to you. The streets are quiet. The tumbleweeds are drifting. Two lone cowboys face off in the middle of the road as the silenced crowd of townsfolk looks on. The sheriff is nowhere to be seen. Why would he be? This is a personal problem, between two men who just moments before were downing whiskey in the local saloon. “You calling me a liar?” The cowhand that speaks, his voice is low, with a southern twang that draws out his words. His hands hover over his gun belt, twitching. Across from him, the other cowhand adjusts his hat, before his own hands assume the position: splayed and itching to draw. There is a flash, and shots ring out. When the smoke and dust clear, one man is dead. And the other rides off into the sunset, not worried about the sheriff riding after him, because he won the gunfight, fair and square. 
The Myth of the Wild West
The Wild West. The Old West. Whatever you may know it by, the western territories of the United States in the 1800s were notorious for being hotbeds of crime, violence, and general lawlessness. The question might become, was the Wild West really that wild? Western towns were known for their saloons, hubs for drinking, dancing, gambling, and of course the gun-slinging cowboys. Was it the people then, that made the Wild West wild?  Or was it the unforgiving frontier? This paper seeks to examine whether or not there was a functioning legal system in place in cowtowns. A structured local government and legal system would dispel the notion that there were no laws in place. This paper will specifically focus on Dodge City Kansas in the 1870s, but there will be a discussion of other Kansas cities during that timeframe, as well as the historical background of how Kansas came to be for context. This paper will debunk the myth that there was no structured legal system in place in Dodge City when the cowboys roamed the streets. Whether or not the legal system was effective is another matter altogether and the author will allow the reader to draw their own conclusions. After all, it can be argued that the effectiveness of a legal system is in the eye of the beholder. Lastly, the paper will examine the social phenomena of lawlessness set against different historical and geographical backdrops. 
While the previous scene is one ripped from the pages of many a western novel, or from the screen of a cowboy movie (in black and white of course), this is also how many envision the frontier justice of the Wild West.  Feuds and grievances, as well as personal attacks were solved swiftly with fists or guns, and that was the end of the disagreement. However, in actual practice, law and order in the Old West were much closer to how we do it now. Part of the hype was that the Wild West boasted colorful characters with a flair for the dramatic. These archetypes were not just limited to rustlers, or outlaws, but to the other people who made up these towns. Frontier justice inclines many to think that the West didn't have a functioning legal system and that the “law of the land” was in the hands of the townspeople. However, these western towns did have local laws. Of course, most people are aware of the sheriffs and their deputies, but there were also courts, judges, lawyers, and county attorneys who resembled today's district attorneys. In the previous fictional tale, there are many instances where a lawman may have intervened. A marshal or sheriff may throw a drunk man in jail if he is being too unruly. A lawman may kick a cowhand out of town if he continues to cause too much trouble. 
It is important to untangle the facts from fiction when analyzing law and or After a lack thereof in Dodge City.  News headlines contributed to making many of these towns larger than life.  Haywood writes, 
[w]hen the Washington Post referred to Dodge as “a wicked little town”, the “very embodiment of waywardness and wantonness” where there were “no hopeful signs of moral improvement”, the Dodge City Ford County Globe faithfully reproduced the slander.  It was an image some Dodge Citians cherished, and other Kansans were happy to perpetuate it. [2]


Of course, so did fiction, from books to movies to songs. Many people are aware of the legendary “Boot Hill” so named because cowboys were buried there in their boots after quick and flashy gunfights.  Cowtowns are famous for the huge number of murders that occur every year. Gunslingers were known for the notches they carved on their guns, each representing a life they took. While many anecdotes of the West celebrate and embrace violence, many of these anecdotes are based more on fiction than fact. Salaciousness and violence led to western towns becoming legendary, so there could have been an incentive for newspapers and local publications to play up the violence and anarchy in now-settled and developing cowtowns. Without these headlines and stories, the Wild West probably would not have such a lasting legacy.  This is not to say that violence did not exist in the west at all. But, some of the literature was designed to capitalize on exaggeration. The next section will seek to explain the historical background of violence in Dodge City and the shift when Dodge City transitioned from a buffalo town to a cowtown. 
Brief History of Kansas and Dodge City
It is probably also vital to understanding cowtowns like Dodge City by looking through a historical lens. Once local government was clearly established, cities functioned differently. But states and cities did not exist in a vacuum. Examining Dodge City in the 1870s will not allow us to ignore the historical context Kansas and later Dodge City emerged from. 
The state of Kansas was indeed forged in violence. Recall the period of time when Kansas was known as “Bleeding Kansas”. Much of the violence then stemmed from a nation on the brink of war over what states admitted to the Union would be free states and which states would not. Allowing Kansas to become a state would tip the “balance” already in place from the Missouri Compromise. Before Kansas made statehood and was merely a territory, and before the civil war between the states would spark, Kansas dealt with a civil war of its own as people vied to bring Kansas into the union as either a free state or a slave state. By the time Kansas became a state in January of 1861, much blood had been spilled. More would spill when the Civil War broke out that same year. The Nation was at its boiling point.[3]


Kansas, home to Dodge City, had a violent past. However, Dodge City became notorious for its violence that had nothing to do with slavery, and everything to do with the fact that it was a mostly ungoverned town when it sprang into existence. In the West, many towns were built around the industries they supported. While cowboys get a lot of the blame for the violence in Dodge City, Dodge City was actually first largely an attraction to buffalo hunters. These buffalo hunters were actually the catalysts for a lot of the crimes and violence. By the time Dodge City transitioned to the cattle trade, they had also established a functional legal system. 
The railroad also brought more industry to Dodge City.  Arriving in 1872, it would help shape some of the development of what was not yet an official city. Dodge City’s first marking as a townsite would be owed to when George Hoover “converted the tailgate of his wagon into a bar, on June 17, 1872, to the great delight of Fort Dodge soldiers, railroad men, and thirsty (some insist bloodthirsty) buffalo hunters.” [4] “The town, however, was not officially incorporated until November 2, 1875.”[5] By that time, Dodge City had already gained a reputation for violence, based on the exploits of the buffalo men.[6] Haywood writes, 


The influx of hunters attracted by the market for hides and meat and the delights of the crude bars, brothels, and gambling joints operating in temporary quarters had created a new kind of boom town. There is no accurate account of how many buffalo hunters there were in and around Dodge City, but one fairly reliable estimate put the figure at two thousand in all of western Kansas in 1872, and Dodge was the center for their operations.[7]


Consequently, “[v]iolence on the streets of Dodge City during its first three years after settlement, if not condoned, was not prosecuted in any orderly or consistent manner simply because the judicial system was not in place.”[8]
Dodge City being a beacon for buffalo men was the primary reason many people attributed Dodge’s early days to being violent ones. And, “[t]here was little need for lawyers while Dodge was the rendezvous for hide men because they found more direct and personal means of settling disputes without third-party involvement and the law’s delay.”[9] It is important to note that this bloody history of violence during this time period was in part due to the fact that there was an absence of organized local government.[10] At this time, Dodge City was essentially lawless, and probably could feed into the stereotypes a bit. However, this would change with the institution of localized government in Dodge. 
Historians “put the number of killings from August 1872 to July 1873 at twenty-five to thirty.”[11] By 1875, Dodge City was a proper town and had a proper justice system. A full legal system was established in 1875 after Dodge City received municipal status as a third-class city. [12] The “machinery for law enforcement had been established”, and there were years like 1877 and 1882 where there were no killings.[13] Furthermore, “[d]uring Dodge City’s cattle days, 1876-86, an average of one and a half persons per year met violent death by gunshot.”[14] 


 In 1876 Dodge City could transition from the court proceeding being held in the old city jail, to having court in a new courtroom. This new courtroom boasted “the best courtroom in western Kansas; good offices for county officers, and a splendid jail” [15]
What exactly makes a jail splendid though? In Dodge City, like many western towns, the priority seemed to be: curb escape. Most jails were not built with the intention to house many, and many people avoided court altogether by escaping. The new jail was less easily escaped and gave the impression that it was sturdy and formidable, and would be harder to escape. [16] The new setting also allowed more of the formalities we associate with court procedures today. [17]
What also might surprise people is that within western towns there was an effort at gun control, probably aimed at containing the oft-cited violence and creating sort of safe zones within cities and towns. Maybe far out on a ranch, a man would need his gun, but within the town, there were laws. A famous photo from 1878 Dodge City,  Kansas boasts a sign reading “The carrying of firearms is strictly prohibited”.  Many western towns had places for cowboys to check their guns upon arrival. 
Could the vigilantism associated with the west have to do with people wanting to make sure justice was served and out of reach of the hands of judges or prosecutors, who might be easily swayed by public opinion or money? After all, even in the old west, money was king. The dance between law enforcement, business owners, and cowboys was apparent in towns, where business owners depended on cowhands for business, but also knew they were prone to make trouble when drunk.  So, laws were necessary for western towns. One of the most famous ordinances in many western towns was the prohibition of carrying a gun within city limits. As mentioned, Dodge City had one, but so did many cities. How could towns that prohibited the carrying of firearms within their limits become the setting for shootouts and gun fights? 
Many western towns had laws on the books that prohibited the most financially lucrative industries, like gambling, alcohol, and of course prostitution. But, instead of instituting penalties that included jail time, the punishment for participating in these activities was usually a monetary fine. Business owners were more than willing to pay the fine and just looked at it as the cost of doing business.  As mentioned earlier, they relied heavily on the cowboys riding through to keep the industry booming. Perhaps Haywood captures the sentiments of the town when he writes, 
…lower courts, the municipal and township courts, were charged…”with the responsibility for crime management.” The justices of peace, even more than the city council, were expected to mold, adjust, and curb activities deemed necessary to the community’s prosperity. In the management of crime, the cattle trade in Dodge required sharp distinction between destructive acts-murder,  highway robbery, horse stealing- and attractive vices- drinking, gambling and whoring. The destructive acts would drive away the buyers and sellers carrying large sums of money; attractive vices would lure the “festive cowboy” to Front Street. The community understood that prostitution required regulation for the common good, but its elimination could not be tolerated because of the adverse effect on the town’s economy. The same general rules applied to other forms of “necessary vices”- gambling, drinking, and boisterous rowdiness.[18]




Take these ordinances from Leavenworth Kansas:


That any and every person who shall keep or maintain in this city any house or other place, on the first day of the week, commonly called Sunday, wherein dancing, theatrical plays or exhibitions, tippling, carousing, reveling, or any conduct or language likely to disturb the peace of citizens residing in the neighborhood, is or are carried on or indulged in, shall be fined not less than ten nor more than one hundred dollars: and any and every person who engaged or takes part in such dancing, theoretical plays or exhibitions, tippling, carousing, reveling conduct or language, shall be deemed to be a person who keeps or maintains such house or another place, within the meaning of this section. [19]
The fifty-eighth section of the 1869-1870 Leavenworth ordinances relates to “house of ill-fame, dance houses, and houses or halls where persons of bad character congregate.” According to the ordinance, persons who maintain “ a house of ill-fame, or prostitution” could be fined not less than ten more than one hundred dollars” for doing so.[20] The same fine was for those who lived, worked, or frequented such houses. So, these fines just allowed the towns to profit from these illegal enterprises.  So, everyone wins here: the customers, the business owners, and the town. 
Cowtowns, as Haywood describes them, were composed of many different people. The nature of cowhands was that they would usually pass through many towns when bringing a herd. They used these towns as places to blow off steam. This meant that many of the troublemakers were strangers, not residents of the town. Of course, actual members of the towns wanted to protect their persons and property and most towns had some form of law enforcement.  The goal of law enforcement was to minimize gun violence, not encourage it. Stray bullets are a fact of life and gun violence always has the chance of an innocent bystander getting hurt.  Sheriffs would sometimes just kick troublemakers out of town. Jails were usually places to hold drunks, not necessarily as a way to punish them but to keep them until their drunkenness wore off. 
Contrary to the myths, shootouts were not the norm in settled towns. No one would want to live in a town like that.
Judges were important figures in the Wild West. Opinions vary on the character and the qualities of the judges, but judges were there. ‘Political hacks’ and ‘wandering lawyers’ is how historian Lawrence Friedman described them. [21] However, other historians disagree. Upbringing probably vigorously shaped political views and leanings. For example, David J Brewster, Supreme Court Justice, had a religious Puritan upbringing, and that shaped the lens of the way he practiced law.[22] He was from a well-bred established family that contained lawyers, and he was highly educated, even attending law school at a time when many just had to study law in an apprenticeship manner to become lawyers. However, Friedman may have felt he was still a wandering lawyer, as Brewer was not originally from Kansas. However, the west in the early days of establishing territory and footholds was mainly derived from people who came out to settle the towns. Only after establishing towns and industry could people grow up in these towns. Most people were transplants, and a lot of people were transitory so a wandering lawyer is not necessarily a bad thing.  Brewer settled in Leavenworth, Kansas.[23] Ironically, he intended to use his law degree as a legislator, not as a judge. But in the course of events, he only received one vote in the election. Illusions of being a legislature shattered, Brewer became a probate judge, which included civil and criminal duties. His criminal duties would become more pressing.[24] 
While Brewer had strict ideas for how he wanted to run his courtroom, what happened in reality, was not always up to his expectations. 


Proceedings in his court, despite his best efforts, were not always as dignified and serious as he wished. In a trial before a jury of farmers, Brewer announced in the evening that he would return in the morning to receive the verdict. Arriving there the next day, he found a deserted jury room. He quickly rounded up the foreman who replied to the anxious judge’s demand for an explanation: “Well it looked so much like rain that we decided we had better go home and look after things.”[25]




Regardless of formalities, courtroom law did exist, contrary to popular belief.  The law in the wild west was not governed merely by Smith & Wesson. However, trials were not always necessarily the outcome sought. As discussed earlier, sometimes towns were content to run troublemakers out of town. Also, a lot of stories of legal figures in the west were blown out of proportion. One of the west’s most famous judges, Isaac Parker, known as “The Hanging Judge” got his name because of all the people he hanged.  But, of the 13, 490 people he tried, he only hanged 79. [26] It is noted that 4,046 of that number (30 percent) were acquitted. Location also factored in. In the old west, traveling judges were common. I think the fact that people might not want to wait for a judge to be available to resolve their issues could lead to justice becoming vigilante justice.
In Kansas, 30.4 percent of felony defendants and 28.8 percent of misdemeanor defendants were found not guilty in 1984. Also, a prosecutor who was known for having a hundred percent conviction rate in Dodge City, in reality, had far less based on a random sample of three sessions of the district court in Dodge City. 53.8 percent convictions, while high is not 100 percent. One notable difference between then and now is that plea bargaining was not used the way it is now, to keep the courts from being backlogged with too many trials. This is not to say that judges did not reduce charges, it is just to say this was done for different reasons.
Becoming a lawyer in Kansas during this timeframe was probably considerably easier than it is today. The requirements to be a lawyer in Kansas were established in 1868 and were:
Any person [being a] citizen of the United States, who has read law for two years, the last of which must be in the office of a regularly practicing attorney, who shall certify that the said applicant is a person of good moral character, and well qualified to practice law, who is actually an inhabitant of this state, and who satisfies any district court in this state that he possesses the requisite learning and that he is of good moral character, may, by such court, be permitted to practice in all district and inferior courts of this state, upon taking the oath hereinafter prescribed.[27]




However, in Dodge City, the legal education of its legal actors varied. For example, most probate judges had no legal training. In fact, only one of Dodge’s probate judges during the cattle town years was ever admitted to the bar. [28] Probate judges had mostly administrative power, but they were able to issue writs of habeas corpus. And, according to Haywood, “the major area of abuse” was derived from their power to do so.[29] A writ of habeas corpus could allow the release from custody of any incarcerated person after a persuasive showing of a denial of a constitutional right or other official illegal conduct. [30] “Considering the frequent informality of arrest and the difficulty of following procedures to the letter of the law because of the distances traveled by the sheriff in transporting prisoners, writs were frequently sought and obtained in probate court.  However, if the arresting officers and sheriffs were not following procedure, perhaps there was no abuse but merely laws in action based on the laws on the books. For example, Sheriff Bat Masterson (who we will see again very soon in Wyatt Earp’s tale) , would run into an issue when he locked some prisoners at the Dodge City Jail after an alleged horse theft whereupon the owner of the horses, Milton Harrison, spearheaded the effort to catch the alleged thieves. [31] Masterson had recently lost the reelection, and that may have affected his efforts he put toward his current duties. He was “at best careless” when he accepted the prisoners and locked them up. [32] This led to the prisoners appealing to the county attorney who would request a writ of habeas corpus when he discovered they were being held without authorization. In response, Masterson wrote to the probate judge at the time: 


To the Probate Court: I hereby state that I hold the within named parties without any authority whatever: that I have no commitment to them. [33]


 It would seem lawmakers did not find there to be abuse because laws would remain to put lawmen at a disadvantage due to the geographical and locational challenges they faced. Regardless of whether probate judges abused any level of their power, probate court received the most criticism, and based on these occurrences mentioned previously it is not hard to see why. 


Wyatt Earp: A Real-Life Example of Fact Meets Fiction
The myth of the wild west leads the observer to believe there was no law and order, and that guns and iron ruled the lands. This was not the case. Towns needed law and order to protect their people and businesses, and lawmen were employed. However, lawmen were not keen on using bullets to get things done. A man with a loaded gun was not someone anyone wanted to face, especially not a mere few feet, face to face, point blank range. And, when shootouts did arise there were consequences. Wyatt Earp is an example of that. The famous shootout in Tombstone, Arizona would have Wyatt and his brothers on trial for murder.  Before that day, Wyatt was a respected lawman in Dodge City Kansas before eventually finding himself in Tombstone. The magic of the west was not just the characters, but how quickly characters could change roles. The hero became the villain, the cowhand became an outlaw and sometimes the lawman became the accused.


While no one can say for certain why Wyatt left Dodge City, there is the suggestion that he had grown tired of the politics that were associated with law, the low pay, and maybe even boredom. One case that probably contributed to his departure was the murder of Dora Hand. In 1878 James “Spike” Kennedy, the son of Captain Mifflin Kennedy, who was a wealthy Texas cattle baron, was in town.[34] Kennedy already had a reputation for causing trouble whenever he brought his herd into Dodge City, and probably was also used to his daddy getting him out of it. By 1878, Dodge City prohibited the carrying of firearms within city limits. Kennedy did not seem to care, and in July of 1878, he was arrested by Wyatt for carrying a pistol within city limits. [35] Only a month later Dodge City’s Marshal, Charlie Bassett arrested him again for disorderly conduct, further infuriating and embarrassing Kennedy. He would go on to complain to Mayor James “Dog” Kelley, probably thinking that his status as a Kennedy and his father’s money would afford him to be above the law. Instead, Kelly informed him “that the officers were doing their duty and that Kennedy would expect another arrest if he continued to disobey the law.”[36] What happened next set off a chain of events that would change Wyatt’s life forever, and most importantly his view of the way law was done in Dodge City. 
After his exchange with Kelly, Kennedy angrily rode out of town making threats, which he returned to make good on. [37] When he returned to town, he fired four shots through the mayor’s bedroom window. [38] Kelly wasn’t even home, but one of those bullets killed Dora Hand, a guest of the mayor’s.[39]  What followed was extraordinary, as told by Steven Lubet. Lubet writes: 
Suspecting Kennedy as the murderer, Ford County Sherriff Bat Masterson quickly enlisted Wyatt Earp, Bill Tilghman, and Charlie Bassett to give chase- “the most intrepid posse ever to pull a trigger,”  in the words of the Dodge City Times. Tracking Kennedy for barely seventy-five miles, the posse finally cornered him before he could flee the state.




One would think that the killing of a woman would anger the town. Indeed, the local press circulated the words being used to describe Kennedy, most notably ‘cold-blooded assassin’ and a ‘fiend in human form’. [40] However, Kennedy would never stand trial for this murder, after a judge dismissed the case for lack of evidence at the preliminary hearing. Earp would suspect that the judge was motivated to do so by the Kennedy name, brand, and money, and would be bitter about it for years to come. [41] Earp and Kennedy’s story is just one example of Dodge City- level justice, but it is not necessarily a blatant disregard for law. Earp and his posse displayed true tenacity in tracking and bringing Kennedy back to face a judge. The story demonstrates a working law enforcement agency and also the criminal justice system. Whether the systems are functioning effectively or correctly is another analysis in itself.  
Judges, as they do now, had a lot of discretion. In Kennedy’s case, the description of the preliminary hearing as behind closed doors speaks to a private event. The outcome, dismissal for lack of evidence may have been harder to come to if the preliminary hearing was a public event. 


There were most likely many reasons that a case would not go to trial.  In cowtowns, many people were temporary inhabitants. If a person was thought to have committed a crime, many times the person could leave town before charges were brought. Sometimes, like with Kennedy, the person could be brought back. I don’t think Bat and his posse would have gone through all the trouble to track Kennedy 75 miles if he was accused of a lesser offense, like maybe being in town with his gun. With lesser offenses, a town probably just saw the disappeared cowboy as a good riddance and continued on with life. You also must look at the optics. When a posse of lawmen left town to track criminals, there were fewer people to protect the townspeople while they were gone. It would only make sense to leave the town unattended for the most hardened criminals and heinous crimes. 
Another problem judges, prosecutors, and lawyers faced was difficulty locating witnesses. The transient nature of cowhands meant that by the time a person was accused of a crime, their star or key witness could be five states away, actual whereabouts unknown. Even if a cowboy knew that a person he rode the trail with was in Texas, he wouldn't have a forwarding address or even actual knowledge that the person had reached their destination. People disappeared all the time. And, even if a witness could be located, would they even make the hard journey back? Maybe, if the accused was a close friend. But to travel for days to appear as a witness in a trial for a person one barely knows would take someone with a strong moral compass. They also would need to not be worried about getting arrested for anything themself.  Furthermore, many cowhands could not read or write at all or could do so very poorly. So, they would have to dictate letters sometimes. And, if a letter arrived for them, find a person to read it to them.


Anarchy in the East?
Part of the reason the Wild West received such a mythical recounting seems to not adequately compare the West to the East. Was the Wild West really violent or were violent practices acceptable and norms even in the East? One of the most famous violent practices that carried over from Great Britain to America was dueling. Dueling bares a remarkable resemblance to a cowboy gunfight: both are usually sparked by a disagreement or an insult to one’s honor, both are usually characterized by a one-on-one showdown, and both usually leave at least one man dead. Why is it then, that a gun showdown in a hot western town has more of a negative connotation than a duel? Essentially, they are the same thing. Dueling was very common throughout the United States until the practice died down post Civil War. Some have hypothesized that the Civil War brought an end to the gentleman’s code of honor that sparked many duels. 
Is the measure of lawlessness determined by what is allowed by the law? Could the legal systems that allowed the cultural norm and practice of dueling be considered as contributing to lawlessness? Or has the legal system always had a protective pocket for social norms? Legitimacy and law have often been discussed. But once the law is recognized as legitimate, is the legal system working correctly because the law is deterred, or law is punished?  The public perception seems to have been dictated by the fact that violence happened and was condemned. Ironically, people die as a result of gun violence a lot in the present day, but there does not seem to be an overwhelming public perception that the USA is lawless because of the crimes and violence that occur. It seems lawlessness might be characterized first by what is or isn’t considered a crime and punished as one. Next, lawlessness could be analyzed by whether or not the mechanisms in place to promote order function properly and effectively. 


Perception of the Wild West also seems to be based on other codes of honor. While an enthusiast of cowboys could accept a one-on-one faceoff between cowhands, they probably would be disgusted with a man who shoots another in the back. That’s murder, in the eyes of law then, and the eyes of the law now. Could people be more accepting of the gun battles of cowboys because they represent two parties actively agreeing to engage with one another? What is self-defense and why is a duel or a gunfight not self-defense? Human sensitivity has seemed to gravitate towards the abhorrence of murder in America, but a man or woman defending themselves is not murder and has never been categorized as such. The archetypes of the Wild West lend credibly to the idea that cultural norms influence law. One might even argue that the reason people could still admire the outlaws of the Wild West was the principles some of them seemed to adhere to.
The distinction between freshly settled towns and towns that were officially incorporated must be made when examining the history of violence and anarchy in towns in the Wild West. For Dodge City, violence actually decreased by the time people had turned their focus to cattle and away from buffalo hides. Contrary to popular belief once the legal systems were in place, laws were enacted and enforced. However, cultural norms, geography, and societal practices shaped how the law was enforced.  Towns had a vested interest in remaining profitable and attracting people to live there. Most of many cowtown profits came from the cowhands that were usually just traveling through. So, while the goal was to attract and cater to their needs, towns also wanted to ensure the safety and security of their residents. Sometimes it was hard to balance both interests, as Wyatt Earp’s entanglement with Jack Kennedy shows. But Dodge City nor cowtowns were unique in sometimes protecting their economic interests over their other interests. 
Today, America has emerged with a criminal justice system with economic interests as well. The cash bail system has created an industry where bail bond companies profit off of the pretrial incarceration of Americans.  Bail itself is often used to punish before a conviction or even indictment instead of incentivizing people to return to court.  So, the intersection of economics and justice is not new and is not going away. In cowtowns, the eagerness to allow cowhands to ride into town and partake in illicit activities was usually the cause for the violence that would ensue. 
The legal landscape of the Old West bears many striking resemblances to the legal system now; there are also many differences.  Regardless, a casual stroll through the historical background of one of the Wild West’s most notorious and “wicked little” cites has revealed that there is more to the town than violence. There was a formal legal system at the same point in time cowboys were riding the streets. Lawmen served and enacted their duties. One of the most interesting phenomena is that many of the things the old west is notorious for was illegal. This paper explored some of the realities of a city that depended on “sin”  for economic growth.  Without the cavorting of cowboys, many cities would not have grown during this time period. Probably the biggest myth of all is that all towns were centers for gunfights and showdowns. While violence did happen, a lot of violence was in places where towns were not developed, as evidenced by Dodge City’s pre-cowtown days. The legal process functioned; trials were held, and just like in today’s courts, sometimes people weren’t happy with the outcome. In separating the facts from fiction a startling revelation becomes clear.  The Wild West was perhaps not as wild as perceived. Or was it? Maybe it depends on whether or not someone would desire to live there. Myths made towns' history live forever immortalized by literature and folklore. With that said; would you want to live in Dodge City in 1875?
































________________
[1] C. Robert Haywood, Cowtown Lawyers: Dodge City and its Attorneys, 1876-1886 3 (1988). Haywood also begins the first chapter of his piece with this quote, and I believe it fits perfectly with the thesis of this paper so I will mirror him in opening the scene with this quote as well. 
[2] Id. 
[3] See R. Alton Lee, Sunflower Justice: A New History of the Kansas Supreme Court (2014). Lee delves into Kansas’s bloody past and the conflict and tension between Free Soilers and those that wanted  Kansas to be a slave state. Lee also describes the political background at the time and some underlying pressures that led to the Civil War. 
[4] Haywood, 6
[5] Id. 
[6] Id. 
[7] Id.
[8] C. Robert Haywood, Cowtown Courts: Dodge City Courts 1876-1886 (1988) https://www.kshs.org/publicat/history/1988spring_haywood.pdf
[9] Haywood, supra 
[10] See Id.
[11] Id. 
[12] Id.  
[13] Id. at 7
[14] Id.
[15] Haywood, supra at 25
[16] Id. 
[17] Id.  
[18] Id. at 29
[19] M. H. Hoeflich, A Rare Edition of the Leavenworth City Charter & Ordinances: A Vignette of Life in 1870 Kansas
[20] Id. 
[21] John D.W. Guice, Territorial Judges in the Rockies: Civilizers or Judicial Derelicts 24 J. West 7 (1985)
[22] Michael J. Brodhead, David J Brewer: The Life of a Supreme Court Justice, 1837-1910 ( 1994) 11
[23] Id. 
[24] Id. at 11
[25] Id. at 14
[26] Haywood, supra, at  24
[27] Id. at 49
[28] Haywood, supra, at 30
[29] Id. 
[30] Id. 
[31] Id. 
[32] Id. 
[33] Id. 
[34] Steven Lubet, Murder in Tombstone: The Forgotten Trial of Wyatt Earp 8 (2004)
[35] Id. 
[36] Id. 
[37] Id.
[38] Id. 
[39] Id. 
[40] Id. at 9 
[41] See Id.